via borrowing hydrogen (Scheme 18).56 Based on the mechanistic studies and our previous reports,57-60 we proposed the reaction mechanism as shown below. Firstly, the formation of cationic iridium species is essential for the activation of alkyne in 84 to undergo indolization, yielding indole intermediate 86. Subsequently a borrowing hydrogen process takes place, including iridium-catalyzed dehydrogenation and acid-catalyzed Friedel-Crafts ketone addition and dehydration to produce the a,b-unsaturated ketimine intermediate 890. Finally, reduction of this intermediate by the iridium-hydride species yields tricyclic indole products 85 in an overall redox-neutral enantioconvergent fashion with the regeneration of catalysts.

## 2.4. Asymmetric cyclization of aniline to allene

In our group's exploration of N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC)-catalyzed enantioselective acylation of phenols,61-63 we became interested in bisphenol or aniline phenol substrates that bear a tertiary alcohol unit such as 90 (Scheme 19). To our surprise,

<!-- image -->

Scheme 22. Enantioselective desymmetrizing Fischer indolization through dynamic kinetic resolution

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

these substrates worked out with a completely different mechanism: the alternative azolium enolate intermediate 93 is generated, which undergoes a facile propargylic substitution onto 90 to produce allene intermediate 94. Lactone formation then produces 95 possessing an endocyclic allene moiety. At this stage, NHC also serves as a BrØnsted base to activate the sulfonamide to undergo cyclization onto the allene to produce bridged biaryls 92 bearing an indole unit. This represents a rare example of indolization via allene insertion and a straightforward access to bridged biaryls in a stereoselective fashion. Using this catalytic procedure, a wide range of chiral indoles 92 possessing both axial and central chirality can be produced in an excellent enantioselectivity as a single atropoisomer.64

## 3. ASYMMETRIC FISCHER INDOLIZATION

Since its discovery as early as 1883, Fischer indolization has been extensively utilized for the construction of indoles.65-67 However, catalytic enantioselective Fischer indolization remained elusive for decades due to the lack of intrinsic chirality in indoles and the necessity to use stoichiometric acid under harsh conditions. Some related exploration of interrupted Fischer rindolization to deliver chiral indolines also met with limited success.68 Achieving enantiocontrol in a

Review

Review

Scheme 23. Desymmetrization of 1,3-diones by catalytic enantioselective condensation with hydrazine and derivatization by Fischer indolization

<!-- image -->

sigmatropic rearrangement process has also remained a significant challenge in asymmetric synthesis.69

## 3.1. Enantioselective aza-[3.3]-sigmatropic rearrangement

In 2011, List and co-workers reported the first catalytic asymmetric Fischer indolization in the form of enantioselective desymmetrization of 4-substituted cyclohexane-derived phenylhydrazones 97 (Scheme 20).70 This process uses chiral phosphoric acid (CPA) as the catalyst, with the addition of cation exchange resin of CG50 to remove the ammonia side-product. Using this methodology, a variety of chiral 3-substituted tetrahydrocarbazoles 98 are obtained in high yields with good to excellent enantioselectivities. With comparison to the classical Fischer indolization mechanism, the authors proposed that the initial substrate-CPA adduct 99 can be converted to both diastereomeric enamines 100 and 1000 as an ion pair with CPA, with one of them undergoing a more favored irreversible aza-[3.3]-sigmatropic rearrangement. This dynamic kinetic resolution eventually produces the final product 98 with high enantioselectivity. The ammoniumCPA salt generated in this process is regenerated by the cation exchange resin CG50.

Three years later, the List group reported another elegant example of chiral phosphoric acid-catalyzed enantioselective Fischer indolization, for the synthesis of indole-fused chiral helicences 103 from the reactions of hydrazine 101 and tricyclic ketone 102 (Scheme 21).71 This represents a rare example of chiral helicene synthesis.72-74

In 2021, Jindal, Mukherjee and co-workers reported the desymmetrization of prochiral 2,2-disubstituted cyclopentane-1,3-diones 105 by reacting it with

<!-- image -->

Scheme 24. CPA-catalyzed enantioselective Doyle indolization to access axially chiral N-arylindoles

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

arylhydrazines 104 through enantioselective Fischer indolization under the cocatalysis of a chiral phosphoric acid and ZnCl2 (Scheme 22).75 A variety of ketone-containing indole derivatives 106 were produced with moderate yields and good to excellent enantioselectivities. Mechanistic studies suggested that the initial condensation between dione 105 and hydrazine 104 is a reversible process, generating interconvertible hydrazone intermediates 107 and 1070. The hydrazones are subsequently tautomerized to the corresponding enehydrazine intermediates 108 and 1080, one of which preferentially undergoes the following indolization to afford the desired product, achieving an overall effective dynamic kinetic resolution. The rate- and enantiodetermining step in this transformation, similar to that in Scheme 19, is the aza-[3,3]-sigmatropic rearrangement.

## 3.2. Enantioselective hydrazone condensation

The reaction pathway of Fischer indolization generally involves two steps: hydrazone condensation between ketone and hydrazine followed by

<!-- image -->

Review

Scheme 25. Rh-catalyzed oxidative [3 + 2] cycloaddition of anilines with internal alkynes

<!-- image -->

rearrangement/cyclization to form the indole product. The few examples shown above involved the latter step as the enantiodetermining one. In contrast, achieving enantiocontrol in a simple hydrazone condensation step remained elusive until our recent work.76 In 2021, our