id substrate. The resultant Pd species then coordinates with the triple bond in 16 as a p-acid to form the key intermediate 18 (favored over the diastereomeric 18′ due to steric interaction between substituents on the aryl group at the alkyne moiety with the catalyst). Subsequent indolization produces 19 in an atroposelective manner, which is followed by reductive elimination to afford the desired 2,3-diaryl indole 17. Oxidation of Pd(0) back to Pd(II) then completes the catalytic cycle.

Following the previous work on the preparation of indoles bearing a chiral axis at the C2 position, the Li group 29 and the Wang group 30 reported, independently in 2021, the Pd-catalyzed enantioselective Cacchi reaction between 2-alkynylailines 20/20′ and aryl halides 21/21′. Notably enantioenriched indoles bearing a chiral axis at the C3 position were produced in these reactions with good yields and excellent enantioselectivities (Scheme 4). The Li group used sulfonyl-protected 20 and an ester-substituent 21 to produce biaryls 22 containing the N-Ts unit. In contrast,

the Wang group adopted trifluoroacetyl-protected 20′ and an electron-rich 21′ as the substrates, the reaction of which yielded alkoxide-substituted biaryl 22′ with a free N-H indole.

Using a C-H functionalization strategy, Li and co-workers disclosed in 2019 a Rh(III)-catalyzed oxidative coupling of indole 23 with 2-alkynylanilines 24 to produce axially chiral 2,3′-bisindoles 25 in good yields with excellent enantioselectivities (Scheme 5). 31 Notably the rotational barrier for these bisindole atropisomers connected by two five-membered rings is lower than that of the analogous biphenyl or indole-arene compounds. As a result, it is more challenging to construct these bisindoles in an atroposelective manner. The mechanism of this Rh-catalyzed system involves C-H activation of indole 23 to form intermediate 26, which subsequently activates the alkyne moiety in 24 to promote indolization leading to intermediate 27. Finally, reductive elimination, which is likely the enantiodetermining step, affords the 2,3′-bisindole product 25. Reoxidation of Rh(I) to Rh(III) is affected by running the reaction in air.

In addition to the above examples of metal-catalyzed atroposelective indolization, organocatalytic methods have also been documented. In 2021, Yan and co-workers reported an organocatalytic formal iodoaminocyclization of 2-alkynylanilines 28 bearing a 2-naphthol unit for the construction of axially chiral 3-iodo-2-aryl indoles 29 with excellent yields and stereoselectivities (Scheme 6). 32 This reaction is proposed to proceed via atroposelective formation of the key iodo-substituted vinylidene-quinone methide (VQM) intermediate 30 by organocatalytic electrophilic substitution of 28 with NIS (N-iodosuccinimide). Subsequent trapping of the vinylidene unit in 30 with the aniline motif affords the enantioenriched 3-iodo-2-aryl indoles 29 with transfer of the axially chirality of allene to the biaryl unit. High diastereoselectivity is also obtained for the C-N axis bearing the ortho-tBu-substituted arene. Notably VQM has been applied as a powerful and versatile electrophilic intermediate in many asymmetric catalytic systems in recent years. 33,34

## 2. CASCADE INDOLIZATION OF 2-ALKYNYLANILINES WITH ANOTHER ENANTIOSELECTIVE BOND FORMATION

The strategy of enantioselective tandem or cascade reactions has shown significant utility in chemical synthesis over the past few decades. Higher efficiency and economy in stereoselective synthesis can be achieved by facile construction of molecular complexity in a one-pot fashion. Novel transformations that are not possible using stepwise approach can also be realized, where unstable, active intermediates can be adopted to achieve multiple bond formation without the need for difficult isolation. 35-42 Using this strategy, indolization of 2-alkynylanilines has been combined with various enantioselective transformations to achieve an overall efficient and enantioselective construction of indoles. Different approaches along these lines are discussed in the following sections.

## 2.1. Indolization of 2-alkynylanilines followed by asymmetric nucleophilic addition

In 2016, Han and co-workers reported an intramolecular indolization/Michael addition cascade reaction under relay catalysis of Au(I) complex and chiral phosphoric acid. Starting from cyclohexadienone-fused 2-alkynylainlines (31), tetrahydrocarbazoles (32) bearing two stereogenic centers were afforded in excellent yields with good enantioselectivities (Scheme 7). 43 Mechanistic studies indicated that Au(I) complex promotes the indolization step to form indole intermediate (33) that is too reactive to isolate. Subsequent chiral phosphoric acid-catalyzed enantioselective Michael addition then generates the desired chiral product 32.

In 2017, Lu and co-wo