absence of comprehensive reviews that would cover detailed information on the methods of indole synthesis of the last ten years, including both modern versions of classical methods and new synthetic approaches based on modern achievements of organic chemistry stimulated us to write this review.

The following abbreviations are used: ACVA - 4,4 0 -azobis(4-cyanovaleric acid), BHT - 2,6-ditert-butyl-4-methylphenol,

Boc tert-butoxycarbonyl,

## Structures 5 - 13

bpy - 2,2 0 -bipyridine, Cbz - benzyloxycarbonyl, CDK - cyclin-dependent kinase, 1,4-CHD - cyclohexa-1,4-diene, Cy - cyclohexyl, dba - dibenzylideneacetone, DBU -1,8-diazabicyclo[5.4.0]undec-7-ene, DCE - 1,2-dichloroethane, DDQ - 2,3-dichloro-5,6-dicyano-1,4-benzoquinone, DFT - density functional theory, DMAP - 4-dimethylaminopyridine, DME - 1,2-dimethoxyethane, DMEDA - 1,2-dimethylethylenediamine, dppf - 1,1 0 -bis(diphenylphosphino)ferrocene, FG - functional group, FLP - frustrated Lewis pairs, Fu - furyl, Hex - n-hexyl, KHMDS - potassium bis(trimethylsilyl)amide, LA - Lewis acid, m -CPBA m -chloroperbenzoic acid, Mes - mesityl (2,4,6-trimethylphenyl), Moc - methoxycarbonyl, Ms - mesyl (methanesulfonyl), MS - molecular sieves, MW-microwave radiation, Naph -naphthyl, NFSI N -fluorobenzenesulfonimide, NHC - N-heterocyclic carbene, NIS N -iodosuccinimide, Ns - nosyl (4-nitrobenzenesulfonyl), PCC - pyridinium chlorochromate, PEG - polyethylene glycol, PG - protecting group, PIDA - phenyliodine(III) diacetate, PIFA - phenyliodine(III) bis(trifluoroacetate), Pip - piperidine, Piv - pivaloyl,

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

| X   | Y            | R 1     | R 2   | Yield (%) |
|-----|--------------|---------|-------|-------------|
| Me  | CH 2 CO 2 Et | OMe     | NO 2  | 69 |
| Me  | CH 2 CO 2 Et | Ac      | H     | 73 |
| Me  | CH 2 CO 2 Et | OPiv    | H     | 65 |
| Me  | Me           | OMe     | NO 2  | 81 |
| Me  | Me           | CO 2 Et  | H     | 75 |
| Me  | Me           | OPiv    | H     | 78 |
| Me  | Me           | OMe     | H     | 84 |
| Me  | Me           | Ac      | H     | 81 |
| Me  | Me           | I       | H     | 85 |
| Me  | Me           | CN      | H     | 78 |
| Ph  | Me           | OMe     | NO 2  | 46 |

reacted with Grignard reagents according to the halogen magnesium exchange pattern, and this was followed by the reaction with ditert-butyl azodicarboxylate.

The arylation of N-tosylhydrazones with arynes (benzene derivative 20 serves as the aryne precursor) and

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

| Compound 21   | R 1       | R 2       | R 3   | R 4   | Yield (%) |
|---------------|-----------|-----------|-------|-------|-------------|
| a             | Me        | H         | Pr n  | Me    | 56 |
| b             | Me        | H         | Ph    | H     | 95 |
| c             | Me        | H         | Ph    | Me    | 90 |
| d             | Ph        | H         | Ph    | Ph    | 42 |
| e             | (CH 2 ) 3 | (CH 2 ) 3 | Ph    | Ph    | 73 |
| f             | (CH 2 ) 2 | (CH 2 ) 2 | Ph    | Me    | 66 |

## Scheme 15

<!-- image -->

radical trifluoromethylation of alkenes, which then react with diazonium salts and undergo the Fischer reaction via a number of tautomeric transformations (Scheme 16). 43

The mechanism proposed for this multicomponent process is depicted in Scheme 17. Presumably, the trifluoromethyl radical generated by a combination of CF3SO2Na, AgNO3 and H2O2 adds to the terminal atom of the alkene to give radical intermediate A, which rapidly reacts with aryldiazonium salt 22 to give radical cation B. Intermediate B is then reduced to intermediate C, which isomerizes to hydrazone D; the latter is indolized according to the usual Fischer synthesis pathway. Thus, the described cascade of reactions forms a new, original approach to the synthesis of the starting arylhydrazones. 43

The proposed one-pot cascade method for the preparation of substituted tryptamines (Schemes 18, 19, Table 1) 44 is also based on a new approach to the synthesis of arylhydrazones. As shown in Scheme 18, cyclic imines, for example imine 24, can be activated with acyl chlorides in the presence of a mediator (pyridine). Pyridine or another mediator (for example, DMAP, i.e., 4-dimethylaminopyridine) forms intermediates 25a, 25b and 25c, which occur in equilibrium. There are two possible pathways to the target tryptamine 29a from enamine 25a or N-acylium ion 25c. Under acidic conditions, intermediate 25a can be hydrolyzed to give amino ketone 26, which is the precursor of hydrazone 27. Alternatively, the addition of phenylhydrazine to ion 25c also leads to the formation of hydrazone 27

<!-- image -->

## Scheme 17

<!-- image -->

D

<!-- image -->

X=Cl, Br

| Ar             | R 1   | R 2   | Yield (%) | Ar          | R 1   | R 2   | Yield (%) |
|----------------|-------|-------|-------------|-------------|-------|-------|-------------|
| 4-O 2 NC 6 H 4 | H     | H     | 88 | 4-ClC 6 H 4 | Cl    | H     | 89 |
| 4-ClC 6 H 4    | H     | H     | 68 | 4-ClC 6 H 4 | F     | H     | 69 |
| Ph             | H     | H     | 45 | 4-ClC 6 H 4 | CN    | H     | 50 |
| 4-MeOC 6 H 4   | H     | H     | 43 | 4-ClC 6 H 4 | Me    | H     | 76 |
| 4-BrC 6 H 4    | H     | H     | 70 | 4-ClC 6 H 4 | MeO   | H     | 41 |
| 2-O 2 NC 6 H 4 | H     | H     | 45 | 4-ClC 6 H 4 | Cl    | Cl    | 52 |
| 3-O 2 NC 6 H 4 | H     | H     | 70 | 4-ClC 6 H 4 | Me    | Me    | 68 |

<!-- image -->

## 2.2. Nenitzescu reaction

The classical Nenitzescu synthesis of 5-hydroxyindoles comprises the condensation of p-benzoquinones with aminocrotonates (Scheme 22). 49

This method still has not lost its significance, as indicated by the continuously appearing pu