%), the desired products were formed in good to excellent yields in CH3CN under 10-20 bar of CO at 140 °C within 15-30 min and with carbon dioxide as the side-product (Scheme 18).

Carbon monoxide is a cheap gas but its use requires safe and controlled environments and systems because it is highly toxic to human. In addition, reactions in which carbon monoxide is used as a gas require suitable equipment to withstand the high pressures such as autoclaves. The use of compounds able to generate carbon monoxide in situ is a convenient, less dangerous and effective method to perform carbonylation reactions using less complex apparatus. In recent years, many syntheses via carbonylation reactions, without the use of carbon monoxide, have been demonstrated. Regarding the synthesis of indoles, Zhou et al. discovered that the combination of Mo(CO)6, Pd(OAc)2 and 1,10-phen, was suitable to afford 3H-indoles from variously substituted nitrostyrenes [38]. CO is generated by heating 1 equiv of Mo(CO)6 at 100 °C in DMF in a sealed glass chamber (chamber 1). Afterwards, the gas passes into another sealed glass chamber (chamber 2) containing the substrate, Pd(OAc)2 (5 mol %), tm-phen (10 mol %) and DMF at the same temperature (Scheme 19).

Ragaini and co-workers, in 2018, 2022 and 2023, developed three procedures for the synthesis of substituted indoles from functionalized nitro compounds by using, in the first two cases phenyl formate as CO source [39,40] and, in the third case formic acid [41]. All of three processes allow the use of inexpensive reactors, in fact, the reactions were carried out in heavy borosilicate tubes. In the first two works, Pd(MeCN)2Cl2 in conjunction with 1,10-phen were used to catalyze the reactions. In addition, Et3N was added to the reaction mixture in order to favor the catalyst´s reduction to Pd(0). In the work published in 2022, some substrates led to a non-selective reaction

Scheme 17: Pd-catalyzed reductive cyclization of 1,2-bis(2-nitrophenyl)ethene and 1,1-bis(2-nitrophenyl)ethene derivatives.

Scheme 20: Synthesis of indoles from substituted 2-nitrostyrenes (top) and ω-nitrostyrenes (bottom) via reductive cyclization with phenyl formate as the carbon monoxide source.

(Scheme 20). On the other hand, in the approach in which formic acid was used, the catalyst system was Pd(acac)2/1,10-phen. Also, in this case the addition of Et3N favored the reaction, moreover, Ac2O was added as additive (Scheme 21).

Scheme 19: Pd-catalyzed synthesis of variously substituted 3H-indoles from nitrostyrenes by using Mo(CO)6 as CO source.

At the same time, Wu and co-workers contributed to the introduction of two new syntheses of N-aroylindole derivatives by means of nickel catalysis. In 2021, they reported a nickel-catalyzed carbonylative cyclization of 2-nitroalkynes and aryl iodides with Co2(CO)8 as the CO source. The reaction was performed in the presence of Ni(dme)Cl2 (a nickel(II) chloride ethylene glycol dimethyl ether complex), dtbbpy (4,4-ditert-butyl-2,2-dipyridyl), Zn(0) and ZnI2 in DMF at 120 °C [42] (Scheme 22). The nickel catalyst catalyzed the oxidative addition and CO insertion on aryl iodide compounds, while the Zn/ZnI2 couple catalyzed the reduction of the nitro group with CO as reductant. The last step is an N-cyclization toward the 2-aroylindole formation with moderate to high isolated yields. In the other example, reported one year later, the same kind of compounds was obtained from 2-nitroalkynes and arylboronic pinacol esters [43]. The reaction took place in the presence of Ni(OTf)2, dtbbpy, Zn(0), and TMSCl (trimethylsilyl chloride) in DMF at 130 °C (Scheme 22). The Ni(OTf)2 catalyzed the

Scheme 21: Synthesis of indoles from substituted 2-nitrostyrenes with formic acid as CO source.

Scheme 22: Ni-catalyzed carbonylative cyclization of 2-nitroalkynes and aryl iodides (top) and the Ni-catalyzed carbonylative cyclization of 2-nitroalkynes and arylboronic pinacol esters (bottom) reported by Wu and co-workers [42,43].

transmetallation reaction with Ar-Bpin and subsequent insertion of CO. The reduction of the nitro group is catalyzed by Zn(0)/TMSCl in the presence of CO. The reaction, again, ends with an N-cyclization giving the N-aroylindoles with fair to good isolated yields. The reaction mechanisms are reported in Scheme 23.

## Synthesis of indoles by Rh-catalyzed carbonylation reactions

In the past, Tang and co-workers demonstrated that vinyl propargylic esters could be employed as five-carbon atom building blocks in [5 + 2] cycloadditions with alkynes or alkenes by carbene intermediates. Starting from those results they envisaged the benzannulation of heteroaryl propargylic esters favored by CO [44]. The process led to the desired result with some effort because a dearomatization, followed by aromatization, was necessary to achieve the goal. With [Rh(CO)2Cl]2 or [Rh(COD)2]BF4 as the catalyst under atmospheric pressure of CO (1 bar), good yields of the desired products were obtained (Scheme 24).

## Carbonylative functionalization of indoles Metal-catalyzed cyclocarbonylative coupling reaction of indoles to 6H-isoindolo[2,1a]indol-6-one scaffolds

Substituted 6H-isoindolo[2,1a]indol-6-ones are important structural components of many naturally occurring and pharmacologically active compounds [45-51]. They are also relevant intermediates in organic synthesis [52,53]. Therefore, the significance of 6H-isoindolo[2,1a]indol-6-ones has led to a long-standing interest in the development of efficient and versatile methods for their synthesis. In 2016, four independent studies reported the first successful application of a metal-catalyzed cyclocarbonylation in an efficient synthetic pathway towards 6H-isoindolo[2,1a]indol-6-ones. In three of these, the products were obtained th