The reaction mechanism proceeds with an initial reduction of Pd(II) to Pd(0) followed by oxidative addition on the ArCH 2 -Cl bond to form the ArCH 2 -Pd II -Cl complex. Then, insertion of CO, from TFBen, takes place followed by nucleophilic displacement and reductive elimination. The obtained compound undergoes selective cyclization to the indole derivative in the presence of Pd(OAc) 2 and AlCl 3 . A variety of indole derivatives were synthetized in good isolated yields (Scheme 3).

Scheme 3: Pd(0)-catalyzed gas-free carbonylation of 2-alkynylanilines to 1-(1 H -indol-1-yl)-2-arylethan-1-ones.

<!-- image -->

## Synthesis of indoles by Pd(II)-catalyzed carbonylation reaction

Oxidative carbonylation reactions, as well as all other types of carbonylation reactions, represent a simple and more environmentally friendly method for the synthesis of important organic compounds. Since the development of the Wacker process, the study of oxidative carbonylations has made enormous progress by investigating even the possibility of catalyzing carbonylative heterocyclization reactions by exploiting the electrophilic character of Pd(II) species. Starting from substrates bearing a triple bond and a nucleophile in the appropriate position, a versatile process of heterocyclization can be initiated, resulting in indole derivatives with important properties. Gabriele et al., in two different periods, reported two paradigmatic examples for indole syntheses. In 2010, they developed the synthesis of 1-(alkoxyarylmethyl)indole-3-carboxylic esters from 2-alkynylaniline imines by using PdI 2 /KI as catalyst system and oxygen as oxidant [15]. In particular, the reaction was carried out using 2 mol % of PdI 2 , 20 mol % of KI and 40 bar of a 4:1 mixture of CO-air, in methanol or ethanol in the presence of an ortho-ester (1:3 mixture) as solvent to prevent hydrolysis of the substrate. After 15 hours at 80 °C the indoles derivatives were isolated in good yields (Scheme 4).

Scheme 4: Pd(II)-catalyzed heterocyclization/alkoxycarbonylation of 2-alkynylaniline imines.

<!-- image -->

Two years later, they performed, using the same catalytic and oxidative conditions, another oxidative heterocyclization/alkoxycarbonylation process for the synthesis of N-substituted indole-3-carboxylic esters and N-H free indole-3-carboxylic esters from N-substituted 2-alkynylanilines and 2-alkynylanilines bearing a secondary amino group and an internal triple bond [16]. In the same research group, it has been demonstrated that with a terminal alkynyl group, the reactivity is completely different leading to the formation of dihydroindol-2-one derivatives [17]. The process was versatile and efficient towards the formation of N-substituted indole derivatives from N-substituted anilines. The direct PdI 2 /KI oxidative carbonylation of 2-alkynylanilines does not lead to the formation of indole-3carboxylic esters but to the formation of acyclic carbamates. For this reason, they performed the reaction in the presence of trimethyl orthoformate to transform, in situ, the primary amino group into a secondary amino group with an easy-to-remove substituent thus performing a not direct synthesis process. Indeed, the desired N-H-free product was obtained by acidic treatment of the reaction crude. In both cases, the targeted products were isolated in good yields (Scheme 5).

In 2014, Shen and co-workers developed a selective synthesis for methyl 1-benzyl-1 H -indole-3-carboxylates and bis(1benzyl-1 H -indol-3-yl)methanones [18] starting from the same kind of substrates used by Gabriele's group two years before. The first indole derivatives were obtained by catalyzing the reaction with 5 mol % of Pd(tfa) 2 (palladium(II) trifluoroacetate) and 1.5 equivalents of p-benzoquinone as oxidant in a 1:5 DMSO/MeOH solvent mixture at a temperature between 0 °C and 15 °C and, for a time between 48 and 120 hours depending on the substrate. In the second case the reaction was catalyzed under the same conditions except for changing the solvent to iPrOH and the catalyst to [Pd(tfa) 2 L] (Scheme 5).

Furthermore, Gabriele and co-workers developed the oxidative carbonylation of 1-(2-aminoaryl)-2-yn-1-ols to quinoline-3carboxylic esters. Meanwhile, they also discovered that by conducting the reaction under non-oxidative conditions the reaction mechanism changed, leading to the formation of indol-2acetic esters via the H-Pd II -I species formed in situ [19]. The reaction was performed in the presence of PdI 2 and KI (2 mol % and 20 mol %, respectively) in methanol under 90 bar of CO at 100 °C for two hours (Scheme 6).

As already seen, triple bonds can be activated by Pd(II) catalysts towards the addition of nucleophiles in the right position, leading to heterocyclization reactions. Taking advantage of this possibility, in the Della Cá group, a carbonylative double cyclization process was developed obtaining 3,4-dihydro-1 H -furo[3,4b ]indol-1-ones from suitably functionalized 2-alkynylanilines [20]. The reaction occurs in the presence of PdI 2 (1 mol %) as catalyst and KI (10 mol %) as co-catalyst in MeCN at 120 °C for 24 h. At the end of the process the catalyst undergoes reduction, therefore, rather using only CO, a mixture of CO-air (12:48 bar) was used with the aim of oxidizing the Pd(0) species in order to restore the catalyst able to catalyze the process again. The reaction mechanism proceeds with an initial interaction between the Pd(II) species and the triple bond that promotes an intramolecular nucleophilic attack of the amino group giving a indolcyclopalladium species. This is followed by CO insertion and intramolecular nucleophilic displacement by the hydroxy group to give the indole-Pd II -cycle derivate. The reaction ends with a reductive elimination and the generated Pd(0) species gets oxidated by the oxygen to the active Pd(II) species (Scheme 7).

<!-- image -->

Scheme 5: Pd(II)-catalyzed heterocyclization/alkoxycarbonylation of